Today, we are talking about pre-arrival test exemptions when re-entering Canada within 72 hours.
As of November 30, 2021, fully vaccinated travellers, who are absent from Canada for 72 hours or less will not require a pre-departure
test, prior to returning to Canada, provided that:
They have completed ArriveCan and are asymptomatic, and they have a valid Proof of Vaccine or are a traveller with a medically
confirmed contraindication to the COVID-19 vaccine,
or are under the age of 12.
This exemption will apply to Canadian citizens, permanent residents, and persons registered under the Indian Act departing from and
returning to Canada by land or air.
The 72-hour exemption does not apply to travellers entering Canada through marine points of entry, nor to travellers who have been
in a country of concern, identified due to the Omicron variant, as they are subject to Enhanced Public Health Measures regardless
of their time outside of the country.
Canada Border Services Agents will be calculating the duration of absence from Canada.
The traveller’s period of absence from Canada will be calculated as follows:
From the actual departure time from Canada to the actual return time to Canada (if travelling by land) or
from the initial scheduled departure flight time, outbound from Canada, to the initial scheduled departure flight time, inbound to Canada,
if travelling by air.
Anyone who is absent from Canada for more than 72 hours, and is not in possession of a negative test result upon arrival for any reason,
must be referred to a PHAC Officer.
PHAC Officers will exercise discretion when selecting the appropriate enforcement action for such travellers, considering information
specific to the circumstances.
If the traveller is arriving by land, and they are reasonably close to the 72-hour threshold where the delay is out of the traveller’s control
(weather, line-up at the border etc), then the quarantine officer has the discretion to apply the extraordinary circumstances exemption.
For example, the border crossing has been extremely busy all day, with a three-hour line up to cross the border.
In this case, the Quarantine Officer may decide to apply the exemption.
If a traveller is arriving by air, and their absence from Canada exceeds 72 hours, then there is no discretion to extend the timeline or exempt
air travellers from the test requirement.
However, in these instances, PHAC Officers may issue the traveller a Notice of Non-Compliance if they’re on-site or a verbal
warning if they’re off-site.
PHAC Officers will process these travellers like any other fully vaccinated traveller to Canada who does not have evidence of a valid
pre-entry test result.
This means that the traveller will be required to take a Day 1 COVID-19 molecular test and remain in quarantine
until they receive their results.
It is important to record the details, of all land or air referrals who are outside of the 72-hour arrival period, promptly in QCMS!
Entry in QCMS will enable appropriate escalation of enforcement measures taken with the traveller, should noncompliance occur
again.
Children under the age of 12, who are not fully vaccinated, and are travelling with an adult of legal custody are also eligible for the
exemption, however they are still subject to a modified quarantine:
They must take day 1 and day 8 tests and avoid group settings including schools and daycare.
As always, PHAC staff working at points of entry should be diligent with existing PPE practice.
Stay safe and healthy, friends, and check out our links and resources for more information.